Zero-point energy, also known as ground state energy, could be the greatest gift 
the quantum world can ever give us. It’s a byproduct of the fact that subatomic 
particles don’t really behave like single particles, but like waves constantly 
flitting between different energy states. This means even the seemingly empty 
vacuum of space is actually a roiling sea of virtual particles fluctuating in 
and out of existence, and all those fluctuations require energy.

If there’s as much energy in those fluctuations as some — though definitely not all — 
physicists believe, and if we could ever learn how to tap into this phenomenon, we 
would gain access to an unparalleled source of energy. Zero-point energy could power 
the planet with the strength of multiple suns, making it easy for us to solve Earth’s 
energy problems forever or to travel beyond the solar system and take our place among 
the stars.

However, we can only guess how much energy is actually contained in the vacuum, with 
legendary physicists in fierce disagreement on this point. Richard Feynman and John 
Wheeler calculated the zero-point radiation of the vacuum was so powerful that even a 
small cup of it would be enough to set all of Earth’s oceans to a boil. But Albert 
Einstein’s theory of general relativity suggests zero-point radiation would “gravitate” — 
spreading out throughout the universe and be mitigated to a weak power.

Simply put, we don’t know enough about the universe to figure out whether zero-point 
energy — vacuum energy — really is a bombastic fountain of staggering power.

Let’s hypothesize vacuum energy is real, and it’s spectacular, and we could maybe one 
day learn how to tap into it for energy. What would this look like, and what could we do with it?

Perhaps the clearest application would be super-fast spaceflight — the kind that could 
take you across the solar system in mere hours or minutes. NASA scientists have looked 
into developing batteries and engines which could theoretically produce a gargantuan 
amount of energy by harnessing a zero-point energy system based on a notion in quantum 
mechanics called the Casimir effect. This effect is small, but if there’s a way to 
observe and intervene with these very small-scale forces, they could work as a potential 
source of energy for allowing spacecraft to move through space.

There have been many different groups that pitched different ideas, but perhaps the most 
reasonable findings have come out of NASA’s Eagleworks Laboratories, which claims to have 
successfully tested a Quantum Vacuum Plasma Thruster. This “Q-thruster”, as outlined by a 
study that passed peer-review last year, takes advantage of the Casimir effect to create 
propulsion. In such a device, thrust is created using particles pushing off a vacuum. 
Nevertheless, it’s not quite clear whether this could work in a real, applicable setting — 
nor can the paper’s authors dismiss concerns about experimental errors. Many more trials 
and rounds of validation would be needed to really illustrate that a Q-thruster is viable.

It’s a bit strange to think that centuries after the idea of an “ether” permeating 
through the world was debunked, physics has come around to say that perhaps there is a 
universal energy stuck in the empty space all over. It would be a mighty grand thing to 
find ourselves grasping at that vacuum for an unheralded amount of energy.

But that’s all pretty far away from humanity’s reach for now. For the foreseeable 
future, it’s probably best to continue banking on solar and wind as acceptable sources 
of energy, no?